ut on the ocean on the weekend. I’ve taken up rowing. Every day I’m not in the restaurant I’m at the ocean on the water doing my rowing. It’s like meditation. I can’t get enough of it. I’m still pretty clumsy but it gets better. Each time I go out I learn something new, either about the boat, about me or about the sea.

The first two I can usually predict their behavior but the sea is always different and it can change in a few minutes while you’re out there. For example, in the short trip across the little bay by my cottage you can be cruising along like you’re in a bathtub and then once you’re away from shore, the waves start coming into play, even on a calm day. The sea is one place where you never assume anything except that the unexpected will happen. When it doesn’t, that’s a surprise.

I can see why it’s often compared to a mother, especially if you’ve had a particularly severe mother, one that expected you to divine her every mood, subtle or extreme. Miss the signs and it could be your life, even in a little bay.

Ok, so you think I’m being dramatic, that I’ve only been out a few times and have never gone outside my own little bay. But my lack of skill and experience make it every bit as perilous as the open water is to your old seadog.  When you’re on land and the weather changes you might close the window, or move your lawn chair, or go in the house and that’s the end of it. But on the water, the still water you left in can start rocking your boat, or cause you to start drifting in towards rocks or any boats or equipment that might be moored nearby.

That’s where the meditation comes in. You need to be constantly aware of a whole range of factors that could affect the outcome of your little excursion. Where are the waves coming from? How big are they? What’s around you? How much steam do you have left?

This last one can be the deciding make or break factor. You must always reckon on how you’ll feel on the way back. Getting there is rarely the problem like getting into trouble is rarely the problem. Novices are notorious for wasting their energy on futile movements and wrongheaded strategies. For example, the long strokes for calm seas can make you unstable when the water gets rough. That’s what I learned this weekend.

When the water got rough I kept at the long strokes and often one oar would catch the crest of the wave to one side while the other would miss because it was in a trough thereby pulling me to one side which meant I had to reorient myself again. If I had been using short strokes I would have been more stable and gotten to shore a lot faster. And a lot less fatigued.

Sounds like a lot of work? It is. I can’t wait to get back out there.
